# STRUCTURE

## Background
To model clusters based on allele frequencies we will use the program STRUCTURE (Prichard et al., 2000) and run it in Digital Research Alliance of Canada (DRAC). The following DRAC website (https://docs.alliancecan.ca/wiki/Structure) has steps and python scripts to run STRUCTURE and STRUCTURE Harvester (to choose the best fit k). Visit the website for where to download the scripts and how to run them.

## STRUCTURE input file
We will use *populations* in **STACKS** to get the structure input file from the filtered vcf file. (output will be a file with a .str ending)

### Inputs

### Flags

### Script
populations_str.sh
```
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH -c 4
#SBATCH --mem=28GB
#SBATCH --time=10:00:00
#SBATCH -o str_%A.out
#SBATCH -e str_%A.err
#SBATCH --mail-type=BEGIN,END,FAIL
#SBATCH --mail-user=EMAIL


vcf=$1
outfolder=$2
popmap=$3


mkdir $outfolder


~/local/bin/populations -V $vcf -O $outfolder --popmap $popmap --fstats --structure --vcf
```
## Running STRUCTURE 

### Files & inputs 
1) create_strauto_slurm_scripts.py
2) input.py
3) strauto_1.py
4) harvesterCore.py
5) structureHarvester.py
6) filename.str (output from *populations* above)


### Steps
1. Edit structure file by removing the header line (first line in the file) and change the file extension to .str
  
2. Load the following modules in the command line:
- module load StdEnv/2020
- module load gcc/9.3.0
- module load structure/2.3.4
- module load python/2.7.18
  
3. Type in the command line: chmod u+x create_strauto_slurm_scripts.py

4. Edit the input.py file:
- change burnin (i.e. 300,000)
- Change mcmc (i.e. 1,000,000)
- number of individuals
- number of loci
- max number of populations
- number of kruns

5. Type in the command line: ./strauto_1.py (follow instructions)

6. Type in the command line: ./create_strauto_slurm_scripts.py

7. Type in the command line: bash submit_strauto_jobs.sh

8. Once all jobs have completed - type in the command line: bash post_strauto.sh

### Outputs 
Folder: *results_f* which has the cluster frequencies for each k run  
Folder: *harvester* which has the evanno k method information to get the best fit k  

## Next steps
1. Make plots in R to look at the Delta K value (generated by the Evanno method) to determine the best fit k (number of populations).
2. Upload results (from results_f folder) to the CLUMPAK website.
3. Make STRUCTURE plot with this data for relevant k values in R. (see rmd file *04_STRUCTURE.rmd*)

## STRUCTURE within populations
I will run STRUCTURE within each population when K=2 and only including individuals that have >0.95% ancestry for a given cluster. This is determined using the STRUCTURE output from all the individuals.  

First we need to subset the .str file to only have the individuals that we want to include using the following line of code in the command line:
```
mawk 'NR==FNR { a[$1]; next} FNR==1 {print; next} {for (i in a) if ($1 ~ i) print $0 }' File_with_individuals.txt LD_HWE_MI20_MAC5.out.recode.p.str > New_population.str
```
Once this file in created, run STRUCTURE as outlined above.

### Notes
I ran structure within the **Calling population** and within the **noncalling population** as determined by the K=2 file (using the above cut off of >0.95% ancestry to a given cluster). The calling population had 14 individuals and the noncalling population had 15. The rest of the individuals had admixed ancestry.
